update prerequisites (#60)
owncloud/docs-ocis: modules/ROOT/pages/prerequisites/index.adoc

=== RAM Considerations

// harvested from https://owncloud.dev/architecture/efficient-stat-polling/
// text adopted based on a discussion with jfd on 24.3.

// fixme: how to read stat info (local and eg nfs)

When it comes to RAM requirements, the question how much is needed can be answered with - it depends.

The need for RAM depends a lot on the quantiy of spaces, the change rate, tasks that will run concurrently and if they access the storage backend. You can split this into following main parts:

> OS Dependent::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OS-dependent::
```

* Needs for the OS

> * Classical caching for storage backends

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Classic caching for storage back ends
```

oCIS Dependent::
* Keeping calculated ETag's in memory
* Keeping static assets like for the web frontend
* The number of concurrent clients accessing oCIS
* Computation processes like calculating thumbnails from files or images

> While memory for computational processes depend heavily on the use case which can be also very dynamic, the memory needed for keeping calculated ETags is easier to predict. Therefor it is essential to make your mind upfront about in which environment you will deploy oCIS. Consider re-reading the xref:availability_scaling/index.adoc[Availability and Scalability] section, with focus on _Scalability_ and _Deployment Evolution_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While memory for computational processes depends heavily on the use case, which can be very dynamic, the memory needed for keeping calculated ETags is easier to predict. Therefore it is essential to make up your mind in which environment you will deploy oCIS before you get started. Consider re-reading the xref:availability_scaling/index.adoc[Availability and Scalability] section, with focus on _Scalability_ and _Deployment Evolution_.
```

==== Keeping Things in Memory

> oCIS has the concept of _spaces_ where a space containing files and folders is not owned by a user by default, but gets assigned to users. Spaces can be the users home, any mount created or an unlimited quantity of shares and re-shares.

Author: ```suggestion
oCIS has the concept of _spaces_ where a space contains files and folders, is not owned by a user by default, but gets assigned to users. Spaces can be the users home, any mount created or an unlimited quantity of shares and re-shares.
```

> oCIS has the concept of _spaces_ which you can see in a nutshell as a space containing files and folders which is not owned by a user by default, but gets assigned to users. Spaces can be the users home, any mount created or an unlimited quantity of shares and re-shares.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
oCIS has the concept of _spaces_ where a space containing files and folders is not owned by a user by default, but gets assigned to users. Spaces can be the users home, any mount created or an unlimited quantity of shares and re-shares.
```

Each space provides a virtual root and occupies at least one metadata block at its root. Whenever a file or folder (node) changes its content or metadata somewhere in the path, the ETag gets recalculated and the change is propagated to the spaces root for identifying a change. To let a client detect changes, the discovery phase starts at the spaces root and checks if the ETag has changed since the last discovery going forward in the tree of changed ETags.

oCIS also has an internal process to identify when changes to files or folders happen to recalculate ETags.

> When oCIS identifies a change, it calculates an ETag which gets propagated to the spaces root. The ETag is only a small entity of 4KB. The number of spaces one oCIS instance can handle can be huge without reaccessing the storage backend, limited by the servers memory only. If you chose a distributed deployment, there is no limit in spaces at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When oCIS identifies a change, it calculates an ETag which gets propagated to the spaces root. The ETag is only a small entity of 4KB. The number of spaces one oCIS instance can handle can be huge without re-accessing the storage back end, limited only by the server's memory. If you chose a distributed deployment, there is no limit in spaces at all.
```

> The benefit keeping the ETag in memory is easy explained. All clients accessing oCIS trigger request for ETags to check for changes. If those are kept in memory, the response time minimises.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The benefit of keeping the ETag in memory is easily explained. All clients accessing oCIS trigger request for ETags to check for changes. If those are kept in memory, the response time minimizes.
```

  
==== Calculation example:

Taking that an:

- ETag uses 4K of memory and an
- inode uses 4K of memory (see xref:filesystems-and-shared-storage[Filesystems and Shared Storage] about different sizes) and that 
- in _all_ spaces available, a change was made on avarage 4 levels below the root

[[sample_environments]]
[caption=]
.Sample environments
[width="60%",cols="^60%,^60%,^70%,^60%",options="header"]
|===
| # of ETags +
(# of spaces)
| ETag RAM
| Inode RAM +
(avarage 4 hops)
| Total RAM

| 1.000
| 4 MB
| 4 MB
| 8 MB

| 100.000
| 400 MB
| 400 MB
| 800 MB

| 1.000.000
| 4 GB
| 4 GB
| 8 GB
|===

Summary::
[NOTE]
====
The above table can be interpreted as follows:

* The memory needed for keeping ETags is based on the number of spaces created (oCIS relevant).
* The memory needed for keeping changed inodes is based on the change rate and the level where the change took place (OS relevant).
* The number of spaces may change slowly compared to the number of changes on files and folders which is more volatile.
====

This leads to the following consideration:

> * Using 4GB of RAM is a good starting point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Using 4GB of RAM is a good starting point.
```

* Regulary check the quantity of spaces a servers must handle

> * Monitor carefully the change rate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Monitor carefully the change rate.
```

=== RAM Considerations

// harvested from https://owncloud.dev/architecture/efficient-stat-polling/
// text adopted based on a discussion with jfd on 24.3.

// fixme: how to read stat info (local and eg nfs)

With regard to RAM, the question how much is needed can be answered with: it depends.

> RAM requirements depend a lot on the quantity of spaces, the tasks that will run concurrently and if they access the storage back end. You can split this into following main parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RAM requirements depend a lot on the quantity of spaces, the tasks that will run concurrently and if they access the storage back end. You can split this into the following main parts:
```

Whenever a file or folder below the root of the tree changes its content or metadata, and inode changes and the change is propagated to the spaces root to indicate it. A new stat info is created and cached and ETags get recalculated if requested based on the stat info. To let a client detect changes, the discovery phase starts at the spaces root to check for changed ETags since the last discovery going forward in the tree based on changed ETags.

oCIS also has an internal process to identify when changes to files or folders happen to create a new stat info which is the base to calculate ETags.

The number of spaces one oCIS instance can handle can be huge without re-accessing the storage back end, limited only by the server's memory. If you chose a distributed deployment, there is no limit in spaces at all.

Here are some numbers based on the ext4 filesystem, see xref:filesystems-and-shared-storage[Filesystems and Shared Storage] for different values:

// fixme: https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/385341

> * An inode has a size of 256 bytes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An inode has a size of 256 bytes.
```

> * The blocksize that is cached by the OS is 4K

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The blocksize that is cached by the OS is 4K.
```

> * A block therefore can contain max 16 inodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A block therefore can contain max 16 inodes.
```

> * A spaces root needs at minimum one inode which results in occupying at minimum one 4k block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A spaces root needs at least one inode which results in occupying at least one 4k block.
```

> * The `stat info` managed and cached by oCIS per space is 1K

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `stat info` managed and cached by oCIS per space is 1K.
```

> * The size of an ETag is 40 bytes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The size of an ETag is 40 bytes.
```

Calculation example::
// fixme: check calculation
+
Consider 500 concurring syncing users, syncing with the default setting of every 30 sec, will create about ~3K PROPFIND requests (500 x 712 / 60 / 2) which consume about 2.4MB/s of bandwidth (3K x 800B) - without doing the file syncs necessary. The physical transfer will create extra bandwidth requirements.

Summary::
[NOTE]
====
As you can see above, the bandwidth requirements depend on:

* The number of concurrent clients accessing oCIS
* The number of spaces to be synced
* The dynamics of changes
* The relative location of a change
* The need to download changed files locally

> The quantity of files and folders in total has only an impact on the first, but not on recurring syncronisations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The quantity of files and folders in total has only an impact on the first, but not on recurring synchronizations.
```

== Additional Software

It is strongly recommend to use a reverse proxy for:

. security reasons,
. load balancing and
. high availability.

> The oCIS documentation will use *traefik* for examples, but you can use NGINX, Apache or others too. All three products named provide either a binary or docker file to download.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The oCIS documentation will use *traefik* for examples, but you can use NGINX, Apache or others too. All three products provide either a binary or docker file to download.
```

[quote, '(C) {traefik_github_url}[Traefik Labs, The Cloud Native Application Proxy]']
____
{what_is_traefik_url}[Traefik] is a modern HTTP reverse proxy and load balancer that makes deploying microservices easy. Traefik integrates with your existing infrastructure components (https://www.docker.com/[Docker], https://docs.docker.com/engine/swarm/[Swarm mode], https://kubernetes.io/[Kubernetes], Marathon, Consul, Etcd, Rancher, Amazon ECS, ...) and configures itself automatically and dynamically. Pointing Traefik at your orchestrator should be the only configuration step you need.
____

[quote, '(C) {nginx_url}[NGINX Reverse Proxy]']
____
{what_is_nginx_url}[NGINX] NGINX is open source software for web serving, reverse proxying, caching, load balancing, media streaming, and more. It started out as a web server designed for maximum performance and stability. In addition to its HTTP server capabilities, NGINX can also function as a proxy server for email (IMAP, POP3, and SMTP) and a reverse proxy and load balancer for HTTP, TCP, and UDP servers.
____

[quote, '(C) {apache_rev_url}[Apache Reverse Proxy]']
____

> {what_is_apache_url}[Apache] In addition to being a "basic" web server, and providing static and dynamic content to end-users, Apache httpd (as well as most other web servers) can also act as a reverse proxy server, also-known-as a "gateway" server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{what_is_apache_url}[Apache] In addition to being a "basic" web server and providing static and dynamic content to end-users, Apache httpd (as well as most other web servers) can also act as a reverse proxy server, also-known-as a "gateway" server.
```

== Filesystems and Shared Storage

> oCIS handles well known metadata like _name_, _size_ and _mtime_ (time a file was last modified). Therefore it requires POSIX-compliant file systems where this metadata can be mapped to extended attributes. 

Author: ```suggestion
oCIS uses well known metadata like _size_ and _mtime_ (time a file was last modified). Therefore it requires a POSIX-compliant file systems where this metadata can be accessed. The availability of extended attributes when using a POSIX compliant filesystems is also a neccessity.
```

> oCIS handles well known metadata like _name_, _size_ and _mtime_ (time a file was last modified). Therefore it requires POSIX-compliant file systems where this metadata can be mapped to extended attributes. 

Author: fixed

> NOTE: An S3 compatible object storage may be supported in the future, but this will require a an extra POSIX-compliant local storage for metadata persistance.

Author: ```suggestion
NOTE: An S3 compatible object storage may be supported in the future, but this will require an extra POSIX-compliant local storage for metadata persistance.
```

== Filesystems and Shared Storage

oCIS currently supports two different internal filesystem drivers which are `ocisfs` and `s3ng`.

> * When the `ocisfs` driver is used, data and metadata must be on a posix compliant filesystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When the `ocisfs` driver is used, data and metadata must be on a POSIX-compliant filesystem.
```

> * When the `s3ng` driver is used, data resides on a S3 bucket and the metadata will be stored on a posix compliant filesystem which needs to be extra provisioned. This is necessary for performance reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When the `s3ng` driver is used, data resides on a S3 bucket and the metadata will be stored on a POSIX-compliant filesystem which needs to be extra provisioned. This is necessary for performance reasons.
```

> Other drivers can be used too like for Ceph or EOS filesystem, but no support can be given because they are not developed or maintained by ownCloud. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other drivers can be used too like for the Ceph or EOS filesystem, but no support can be given because they are not developed or maintained by ownCloud. 
```

The currently supported oCIS POSIX-compliant file systems are the following. Note that the default block size impacts the caclulation example at xref:sample_environments[RAM Considerations], which is on some filesystems definable and if applicable, is for informational purposes only:

> Note the support for a Windows compatible filesystem like samba will be available in a later release and separately announced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the support for a Windows compatible filesystem like Samba will be available in a later release and separately announced.
```

| Name
| Default Block Size

| {nfs_url}[NFS]
| The block size depends on the `rsize` parameter in the mount options. Defaults to 4K, usually set to 32K.

| {cephfs_url}[CephFS]
a| CephFS has a different concept with regards handling metadata impacting memory requirements. See the {cephfs_ram_url}[CephFS Hardware Recommendations] for more details.

NOTE: Note that CephFS is not equal to Ceph-S3. +

> Ceph is an open source flexible distributed storage system (multiserver, multi-rack, multi-site) with an object storage layer. Ceph-S3 presents that object storage with an API that emulates the AWS' S3 API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ceph is an open source flexible distributed storage system (multi-server, multi-rack, multi-site) with an object storage layer. Ceph-S3 presents that object storage with an API that emulates the AWS' S3 API.
```

> Ceph is an open source flexible distributed storage system (multi-server, multi-rack, multi-site) with an object storage layer. Ceph-S3 presents that object storage with an API that emulates the AWS' S3 API.

Reviewer 2: note that you cannot access the same files in CephFS and Ceph-S3. Ceph allows exposing commodity hardware as either blockstorage (RBD), S3 or CephFS. IT is not possible to write a file via S3 and ther read it via CephFS.

Author: fixed

| Name
| Default Block Size

| {nfs_url}[NFS]
| The block size depends on the `rsize` parameter in the mount options. Defaults to 4K, usually set to 32K.
|===

NFS Notes::
+
[NOTE]
====
When using NFS, you have to take care that the NFS server provides `Extended Attributes`.

NFS storage based on Linux servers::

> Extended attributes are supported by NFS starting with Kernel version 5.9, which means that the server with the NFS server has to run a kernel with that or a higher version number. To check, run the command `uname -a` on the NFS server and compare the displayed version number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extended attributes are supported by NFS starting with kernel version 5.9, therefore the NFS server has to run on a system with kernel 5.9 or higher. To check, run the command `uname -a` on the NFS server and compare the displayed version number.
```
